configuration section and download cache docs (#1544)
conan-io/docs: configuration/download_cache.rst

.. _download_cache:

Download cache
==============

.. warning::

    This is an **experimental** feature subject to breaking changes in future releases.

.. warning::

    This is an **advanced** feature, use it only if you fully understand this document. Do not use it if you are mixing api V1 (without revisions)
    and api V2 (with revisions) clients.

Conan implements a shared download cache that can be used to reduce the time needed to populate the Conan package cache
with commands like :command:`install`, :command:`create`.

> This cache is purely an optimization mechanism. It is completely different to the Conan package cache, (typically the ``<userhome>/.conan`` folder).

Reviewer: Somewhere around here or the previous lines we need a link to the Conan cache: https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/mastering/custom_cache.html?highlight=conan%20cache

Author: Added link

> This cache will store in a given path, which can be configured in **conan.conf** file, the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This cache (whose path can be configured in the *conan.conf* file) will store the following items:
```

- All files that are downloaded from a Conan server (conan_server, Artifactory), both in the api V1 (without revisions) and V2 (with revisions).

>   This include files like *conanfile.py*, but also the zipped artifacts like *conan_package.tgz* or *conan_sources.tgz*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  This includes files like *conanfile.py*, but also the zipped artifacts like *conan_package.tgz* or *conan_sources.tgz*.
```

- The downloads done by users with the ``tools.download()`` or ``tools.get()`` helpers, as long as they provide a checksum (md5, sha1, etc.). If

>   a checksum is not provided, even if the download cache is enabled, the download will be always executed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  a checksum is not provided, even if the download cache is enabled, the download will be always executed and the files will not be cached.
```

The cache uses the URL of the download, appending the checksum when provided. In the api V2, it is not necessary to append the checksum, because
the URL itself already encodes the recipe revision and/or the package revisions, which are already checksums of the recipe and package respectively.

.. warning::

    The download cache will not be able to correctly cache artifacts with revisions enabled if those artifacts are created and uploaded repeatedly

>     with a client without revisions, because that will keep overwriting the revision "0".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    in a client without revisions, because that will keep overwriting the revision "0".
```

>     with a client without revisions, because that will keep overwriting the revision "0".

Reviewer: I would move the content of this warning together with the one at the beginning of the section, the are about the same: do not mix v1 and v2 and this cache

I wonder if we should detect _revision 0_ in the Conan v2 API and not use the cache for those artifacts...

Author: Yes, we should, will open a ticket to implement this protection in next releases. While writing it I realized that the docs might not be enough, and eventually users will hit this.

Author: https://github.com/conan-io/conan/issues/6467

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Activating the download cache

> -----------------------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-----------------------------

```

> The download cache is activated and configured in the *conan.conf* file (see :ref:`conan.conf reference <conan_conf>`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The download cache is activated and configured in the :ref:`conan_conf` like this:
```

.. code-block:: text

    [storage]
    download_cache=/path/to/my/cache

> You can also define it with a Conan comand

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It can be defined from the command like as well:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    $ conan config set storage.download_cache="/path/to/my/cache"
    # Display it
    $ conan config get storage.download_cache

And, as the *conan.conf* is part of the configuration, you can also put a common *conan.conf* file in a git repo or zip file and use

> the :ref:`conan_config_install` command to automatically install it in Conan clients.

Reviewer: How to deactivate it?

Author: Adding docs.

It is not related to the ``short_paths`` mechanism for long path in Windows, nor to the ``short_paths`` cache folder. The cache will contain a copy
of the artifacts, it is not a new location of files. Those files will still be copied to the Conan package cache, which will not change anything,
its behavior, layout or location of any file.

This cache (whose path can be configured in the *conan.conf* file) will store the following items:

- All files that are downloaded from a Conan server (conan_server, Artifactory), both in the api V1 (without revisions) and V2 (with revisions).
  This includes files like *conanfile.py*, but also the zipped artifacts like *conan_package.tgz* or *conan_sources.tgz*.
- The downloads done by users with the ``tools.download()`` or ``tools.get()`` helpers, as long as they provide a checksum (md5, sha1, etc.). If
  a checksum is not provided, even if the download cache is enabled, the download will be always executed and the files will not be cached.

The cache uses the URL of the download, appending the checksum when provided. In the api V2, it is not necessary to append the checksum, because

> the URL itself already encodes the recipe revision and/or the package revisions, which are already checksums of the recipe and package respectively.

Reviewer: These lines are implementation details, IMO, not for docs

Author: Simplified, removing details.

.. warning::

    The download cache will not be able to correctly cache artifacts with revisions enabled if those artifacts are created and uploaded repeatedly

>     in a client without revisions, because that will keep overwriting the revision "0".

Reviewer: Same issue if the user changes the proxy, maybe we can mention it here. Those changes won't invalidate the cache

Author: Yes, lets add it.

Activating/deactivating the download cache
------------------------------------------

The download cache is activated and configured in the :ref:`conan_conf` like this:

.. code-block:: text

    [storage]
    download_cache=/path/to/my/cache

> It can be defined from the command like as well:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It can be defined from the command line:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    $ conan config set storage.download_cache="/path/to/my/cache"
    # Display it
    $ conan config get storage.download_cache

And, as the *conan.conf* is part of the configuration, you can also put a common *conan.conf* file in a git repo or zip file and use
the :ref:`conan_config_install` command to automatically install it in Conan clients.

> To deactivate the download cache, you can remove the entry ``download_cache`` from the *conan.conf* file directly editing it, or with the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deactivate the download cache, you can remove the entry ``download_cache`` from the *conan.conf* with the command:
```

I wouldn't promote editing that file directly (people already know they can do that)

.. code-block:: bash

    $ conan config rm storage.download_cache

Concurrency, multiple caches and CI
-----------------------------------

The downloads cache implements exclusive locks for concurrency, so it can be shared among different concurrent Conan instances.
This is a typical scenario in CI servers, in which each job uses a different Conan package cache (defined by ``CONAN_USER_HOME`` environment
variable). Every different Conan instance could configure its download cache to share the same storage. The download cache implements interprocess
exclusive locks, so only 1 process will access at a time to a given cached artifact. If other processes needs the same artifact, they will wait
until it is released, avoiding multiple downloads of the same file, even if they were requested almost simultaneously.

For Continuous Integration processes, it is recommended to have a different Conan package cache (``CONAN_USER_HOME``) for each job, in most of the cases,
because the Conan package cache is not concurrent, and it might also have old dependencies, stale packages, etc. It is better to run CI jobs in a clean

> environment.

Reviewer: It is ok to mention here that the _Download cache_ is implemented thread and process safe, but I'd move the things related to CI to the place in the docs where we are talking about CI integrations. There people can read all the recommendations together: download cache, do not share user_home, link to the Artifactory-Jenkins plugin, some example jenkinsfile,...

Author: The https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/integrations/ci.html is not the right place for this. That section is describing other technologies, and ways to integrate, not "good practices", there is not a general "CI" section yet. We should probably add one in the docs, but lets leave this here until them, as this is a good rationale of the existence of this download cache.

Reviewer: Yes, that's not the place, maybe we need one.
